Good morning ladies and gentlemen and
welcome to session 405 Java Web Services.
Waiting patiently on stage
for his cue is Steve Lewallen.
Please welcome Steve.
Good morning.
So I am the tech lead for
Java classes at Apple,
and today I'm actually going to
talk to you about Java web services
from the client perspective.
Before I came to Apple a few years ago,
I worked for a company that has a little
bit to do with web services called IBM.
And I did a bunch of client stuff,
so don't get worried that
suddenly there's a server guy,
you know, doing classes stuff at Apple.
But I did do some server stuff as well,
including working on
a project called UDDI,
which is a business
directory for services,
and I'll talk a bit
about that more later,
with Microsoft and Ariba, as well as IBM.
Those were the original founders of that.
And it was interesting to be involved
in that because that was when the
original thinking was taking place.
How are people going to use web services?
What are they going to do with them?
And it wasn't just all about B2B.
But as I look out on the web today,
if I go to a website and I want
to learn about web services,
I'm hit over the head with server stuff.
I'm told how to set up my web server.
I'm told I need this
server and that server,
and I need a configuration
file and all these things.
But web services is
mostly about a client,
hopefully.
Hopefully there will be far more
clients out there than servers.
So given Apple's focus on clients,
I wanted to give you a perspective
of web services solely from
the client's perspective.
A developer building
a client application.
So I'm not going to set up a web server.
I'm going to use web
servers out on the web,
live, that Apple doesn't run.
I have a couple of them in case
these companies decide to take
theirs down during my demo,
which can happen in a demo.
So with that,
I think the thing to do first
is define what a web service is.
A few years ago,
when I don't know who it was
that coined the term web service,
came along and did that,
everyone stood up and said,
they recognize the dollar value.
This is the latest lingo.
And so they said, oh,
I have a web service.
Everything I have is a web service.
My web server's a web service.
My email's a web service.
My phone's a web service.
Whatever's a web service.
It kind of watered down the meaning of it
to the point where if you wanted to have
a definition that covered everything,
you'd probably have
something like the following.
You'd say it's just an automated
application that's accessible
via any type of protocol,
HTTP, SMT, or whatever,
that you message with XML.
In this presentation,
given my previous background at
IBM where we dealt a lot with SOAP,
I want to focus the
definition down to being this,
but with SOAP specifically.
And I'll talk, specifically,
and I'll talk about what SOAP is
and in detail and how you use it,
et cetera.
So I also want to get across the
point that Mac OS X is a great free
quote-unquote client for web services.
We have a lot of different technology
to help you build a web services client.
One of the best, a little prejudicial,
but is J2SE built in Mac OS X.
And with 1.4,
we're moving ahead with that
even more where an XML parser is
included by default with J2SE 1.4.
And of course,
you have a great network stack
accessibility in J2SE on Mac OS X.
And it's also, of course,
fully compatible with open source.
One of the drivers for web
services is the Apache community.
And in fact,
I'm going to be demoing some of
their code here today called Access.
And this is just a SOAP SDK.
It's a really good one.
I like it for a number of reasons,
one of which is it's
protocol independent.
that's a theme I'm going to hit a
few times during the presentation,
because the protocol aspect of SOAP,
by many, is believed to just be HTTP,
just because that's de facto the
first protocol people are using.
But there are others
that you can use as well.
And I just want to point out
that SOAP Access is also used by
our WebObjects group for their
client and server Web services.
But I also want to point out that you
can do all of this on J2SE 1.3.1 as well.
You just need to pull across the
down-to-earth machine an XML parser
like the Xerces parser is a great,
great parser.
To build a web service, you,
again taking this definition further
where you actually need SOAP,
you start with SOAP.
That requires an XML parser,
a good network stack,
and protocol support,
whichever one you want to
run your SOAP requests over,
which in this case would be HTTP, SMTP,
etc.
To define what SOAP is, SOAP stands for
Simple Object Access Protocol.
This is a definition I copied
from the folks who did SOAP.
I added XML-based, but basically this is
the official definition.
Lightweight XML-based protocol
for exchange of information in a
decentralized distributed environment.
It gets a lot of buzzwords in there.
What this really means,
when I was involved in
this work a few years ago,
in establishing these
standards in UDDI especially,
The problem that was really
[Transcript missing]
But all those devices and the
protocols that you use to get from
one to the other are disparate.
There's all kinds of things going on.
So you can't use the
traditional middleware of Corbo
over IOP or straight HTTP,
piggybacking on HTTP,
which a lot of us have been doing
to get through the firewall issue.
So, you need something that captured the
meaning of what you wanted to do,
but was independent of all these
protocols to connect all these
different devices together.
It's sort of like the analogy
that I like to give is,
if I write a letter today,
if any of us write a letter,
we write it in the
language of our choice.
I'd write it in English.
And all I can guarantee is
the content of that message,
and I pretty much have an idea
that whoever's eventually going
to receive it is going to be the
one that's going to receive it.
And whoever's going to receive
it knows the same language.
They can read English.
But once I put that
letter in the mailbox,
I don't know how it
gets to its destination,
plane train or automobile.
I don't know.
All of the above.
Maybe it's carried on foot.
Who knows?
But the same is true of SOAP.
Again, most people have an idea of it
just running over HTTP protocol,
but it could go over all sorts of things.
SMTP is one of my favorites
that's not used yet,
really.
So, all that matters.
All that matters, then, is that package,
the SOAP payload that gets across the
meaning of what you're trying to do.
[Transcript missing]
So I wanted to just touch upon
a few real world applications.
And a month or two ago,
I stumbled across these.
UC Berkeley is deploying a unified
messaging system using SOAP.
I don't know how far along
they are with this program,
but the gist of the idea is that
they have their student records,
class schedules,
all these different things,
and legacy systems.
And they want to provide
access to this information via,
over the phone, you know,
you just press the buttons, you know,
press one for the class schedule,
press two for whatever.
And they also want to provide
access through the web as well.
So with SOAP, they can have these systems
package up these SOAP messages.
And someone calls on the phone
and they type in a certain number,
their student ID,
or they go on the web and
type in the student ID.
Eventually,
SOAP message will be packaged up
and off it goes to some system
and gives them some results.
The United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom has an e-government
interoperability framework.
And the theme of this,
the desired structure of this is that
central and local governments would share
all their information via SOAP and UDDI,
the Universal Description
Discovery and Integration,
kind of the business directory type
thing that I worked on a few years ago.
So those are real world things people
are really getting their work done.
And they're not going with
other traditional things,
Corbar or RMI or something.
Those are great,
but because of other limitations,
they're scaling for what customers
and things they can connect
is more limited than SOAP.
So now I want to go over just
a SOAP technical overview.
I'm not going to plunge very, very deep,
but I do want to show you the structure
of SOAP and a bit about how it works.
So again, SOAP is XML-based messaging.
If you look at a SOAP message,
and I'll show you a few, it's in XML.
It's all in XML,
which is great because anyone
can get out a parser and they can
parse it and they can build XML.
You could construct a SOAP message
by hand even and just send it across
with a put or something over HTTP.
The SOAP message itself, again,
being transport neutral,
just defines the contents of the message,
who it's eventually intended for,
and optional attributes that can be used.
I'll discuss optional
attributes in a bit.
No method of how to send or receive
the SOAP message is comprised
in the SOAP message itself.
SOAP is inherently actually one way.
It's just a message.
It gets sent off.
That's all there is to it.
But the de facto way people
have been using it over HTTP...
That's request-response.
That has formed a good RPC mechanism
that people are used to.
They have a response
format that comes back,
and we'll talk about
more of that in a minute.
SOAP also defines a
fault reporting system.
Eventually, if something goes wrong,
you want to know what went wrong,
where it went wrong,
get some description or
something you can tell your user.
So, graphically speaking,
containment-wise, on the right-hand side,
you have the SOAP envelope.
In it,
you have the SOAP header with these
optional elements and the SOAP body,
the actual meaning of the message.
With the SOAP headers,
you can define optional attributes.
Some people are sticking transaction
IDs in them and doing other things,
and that is going to be leveraged as
other standards for SOAP come along.
It's the generic holding
place for these other things.
You can also specify
something in SOAP that says,
when my message gets somewhere and
I have some extra optional header,
since I don't know exactly how
it's going to arrive there,
it might go through some other node,
and I'll describe what
a node is in a minute,
I want to make sure that that guy
can understand what I'm saying,
that he's just not parsing it,
ignoring what he doesn't understand,
and sending it on.
So, there's an attribute there that
says you must understand this
if you don't generate a fault.
And again, the SOAP body contains
the actual message.
So, nodes, roles, and actors.
If you really want to understand how
SOAP works and how SOAP is envisioned
to work more than just over HTTP,
just a two-peer architecture,
a client-server,
you should understand nodes, roles,
and actors.
So, SOAP messages are processed by nodes.
Everything in a
transaction is a SOAP node.
A client is a node.
The final destination is a node.
Anyone in between is a node.
Nodes play different types of roles.
There's three default roles,
and you can define additional
roles if you want yourself.
The next role, it's called next,
is just whoever receives
the message next.
Everybody implements the next role,
and they must, by implementing that role,
properly parse the message,
generate a fault if they don't
understand certain things,
etc.
There's an anonymous role,
which is just a final destination.
There's a non-role,
which is you may define custom roles
and things and have additional header
elements that really are just additional
data to other header elements.
So, in that case,
you just have a non-role for that, and,
of course, custom ones.
So,
you could have a role that says logging.
Let's say that you wanted your
message to be logged at each site
along the way that it traveled.
You could define a log role,
and you could say each node must
understand that role if they
don't generate a fault code.
So, that's the nodes, roles, and actors.
And, again,
this diagram is just demonstrating
we have three different nodes.
They have different roles.
The message is going
over different protocols.
Generally,
the client only knows the first protocol.
He's not aware of whether the
message travels along multiple nodes.
or he's sending it to
its final destination.
And by the way, I mean,
SOAP can even be defined.
The transport can even
be defined as I copy.
You know, I'm sitting in an application.
I have two machines,
and I'm sitting at one machine,
and I do something, and it says,
please insert a floppy,
and I insert a floppy, and it writes a
SOAP message to that floppy,
and it says, please eject floppy and
carry it over to machine B,
and I do that,
and I stick it in machine B,
and I hit a button, and it reads it in,
and then it writes back a
SOAP response on the floppy.
It says, please eject this and
stick it in machine A,
and I do that as well,
and that's valid as well because
SOAP doesn't define the protocol.
In that case, I was the protocol.
[Transcript missing]
So this is a slightly more
interesting SOAP RPC message.
The additions here really
are on the SOAP body.
In line 6,
we see the method name echo string.
This is a very simple RPC.
It's just echo back to
me what I sent to you.
It has a test parameter
in line 7 that says hello,
and then it gets a response.
And SOAP RPC replies a structure,
first thing being the return value,
and then the out and in-out parameters
in the same order they were sent in,
or a fault code with fault string,
fault actor.
So you want to know if there were
10 nodes within this SOAP message,
how the SOAP message was processed.
You want to know that the 7th
node is the guy that failed,
and you want to know why.
You don't want to just know, oh,
it went into the great bit
bucket in the sky and died.
So the SOAP RPC reply then
for that is very simple also.
We see this echo string
response in line 4.
In line 5, we see the hello string back.
Very, very simple.
Obviously,
you can do much more complex things,
but that's what fit on the screen,
so that's why I put that up there.
So this isn't worth a whole lot if
you don't have some way to describe
the interface to your SOAP service.
And you do that by using the web
services description language.
And that's IDL, an XML schema.
If you're familiar with Corbo
or DCE or DCOM or something,
you always had an IDL,
some intermediate description
language you wrote your interface in.
Eons ago, people would sit down and write
their interface in IDL first,
then generate from that a
skeleton for their server,
stubs for their client,
fill out the logic for their skeleton,
and then implement the
application with that.
Nowadays, people like to start with a
language they're familiar with.
One of the reasons RMI is so great
is that its interface is Java.
So you just write your
Java RMI application.
And then you can do that.
If people want to, using RMI IRP,
for example,
they can generate IDL from that instead,
kind of the reverse.
The web services IDL, WSDL, specifies,
again,
what you'd expect in these other IDLs.
Method name, printer types,
location of the service,
which is kind of new.
This is optional, but in WSDL,
if you go grab some WSDL off the web,
and I'll show you in a bit some places
where you can do that quite easily,
it has the DNS name for the web
service that you'll be talking to,
which is really neat.
You just get the WSDL,
and a lot of times that's all you need.
So again,
WSDL is typically used to provide client
interface to existing web services.
So what people are doing right now
is taking legacy systems that are
running in Corbo or something else,
and they're using compilers
such as Java to WSDL that reads
Java and generates WSDL from it,
and then they're giving it to
their Microsoft and Net clients,
or other Java clients that are
then using that with a WSDL to
Java or WSDL to .NET or whatever.
I haven't used the .NET tools,
but that generates then
the language-specific
bindings that they need.
And again, as I said,
it may be used to initially
define the interface as well.
This is a typical WSDL scenario.
Again, people have their
existing server in Java.
They use that compiler I mentioned.
They generate the WSDL,
and they publish the WSDL to some
sort of web services listing.
Sometimes that's a UDDI type of thing,
which is more like a DNS--people can use
it almost as a DNS lookup or something.
and his team.
They just put it on a web page,
and we'll go into more of that later.
Somebody else comes along,
they grab the WSDL again,
and there is no such thing as
WSL to Objective-C compiler,
but if there was such a thing,
you'd read in WSDL,
generate an Objective-C binding,
so you get an Objective-C object,
bring it into your IDE and build your
business application out of it so
that then you can call the existing
server up there at the top left.
[Transcript missing]
So, manual discovery is what
I term the Yahoo approach,
where somebody has
manually cataloged this.
Either a company is out there
searching the web for web services,
and they're publishing them.
I'll give a couple examples of that.
Actually, they're at the bottom.
Southcentral.com, xmethods.com,
those are two good ones.
If someone adds to this
service a search engine,
an index, categorization,
I'll give you a demo of what
those web pages look like.
The semi-automatic discovery
is a well-specified lookup.
Actually,
a lot of people are providing web
services to look up web services.
An example of that is UDDI,
as I mentioned before.
This is an industry initiative
for publishing web services
and discovering them.
The latest inspection I mentioned,
and Disco is a Microsoft legacy
version they had.
I believe they still support it,
but they've also embraced UDDI.
So Universal Description, Discovery,
and Integration.
This is two things.
This is one, a directory service,
a virtually single directory
service running on the Internet that
is actually made up of nodes
shared between Microsoft,
IBM, HP, SAP, etc.
that you can go to,
you can publish your information
about your business service,
like I sell tires or something.
And within, say, 24 hours,
that information is
replicated to the other nodes,
Microsoft's and HP's and SAP's,
so that it virtually
looks like one directory.
And then anyone can go to any of those
nodes and look that information up.
They provide another interface,
just a web browser interface,
another categorization
way to discover things.
You can also have
private implementations.
You can just take the UDDI spec and
implement it inside of your company.
You can write it from scratch.
You can also implementations of it that
you can get from different companies.
In fact, our WebObjects 5.2 will include
an Internet UDDI server that they
built using WebObjects and just
implementing the interfaces to UDDI,
which are SOAP interfaces.
So that's kind of cool.
So, the WebObjects 5.2 is the
name of your business,
the type of business it is,
so it can be categorized,
a URL to the website.
You get a unique ID from the registry to
uniquely identify your business entity.
You say what services you provide.
You could say I sell
widgets and specifications.
In the end,
the specifications would most likely
be WSDL along with the document.
So, this morning I was messing around
and I downloaded Google's WSDL stuff.
It's really cool.
Just worked like a charm.
And in that,
they have a document and other
things that describe how to use it.
For example,
it says you first must register
at Google to get your account ID.
And you must send that
along with your request.
So that type of information
can't be described in WSDL.
But they also then
include the WSDL itself.
So, the WebObjects 5.2 is a great way
to categorize business and services.
There are common industry taxonomies.
The government has a taxonomy
to define businesses.
Even the UN has a taxonomy.
So,
it's just a way for people to look up,
to start to drill down and to find
the service they're interested in.
UDDI Operators.
Each operator,
this is in the Universal Directory again,
has a registry.
They replicate that information.
It's not real time.
Again, registration takes place
at any operator site,
so just conduct it at any operator site,
as I mentioned.
Here are a few UDDI SDKs.
There's a UDDI for Java,
which is done by IBM HP and SAP.
Again, it provides the SOAP interfaces
to look up things in UDDI.
It's very easy to use.
Microsoft Visual Studio.net
also has a similar SDK.
There are also various people out there
that are just creating new web services
to browse UDDI in different ways.
Web Objects 5.2 includes a UDDI version
2 database and an EO model for that,
which is really cool.
So I want to do a couple of demos.
And the technologies for the demo,
just J2SE, 1.4, XML parser,
the Access Soap Toolkit,
a little bit of Objective-C.
So just to show you what
the demo is all about,
I'll switch to my demo machine here.
And the first thing I want to do
is basically what this service is,
and I'll go and show you how I built it.
But what it is,
is if you're familiar with
Mac OS X and application menus,
every application has a services menu.
And this is just how I happen
to tie in my web service.
It's kind of unfortunate that
this is called services and
I'm talking about services,
but they're different things,
local services versus web services.
But I did tie it in,
so I have something called Find News.
And there's a company called
Moreover News out there that
has a WSDL interface to...
News sources all over the web.
So what I did is I created a client
that when you're in a Cocoa app,
even in Terminal or something,
and you go to services
and you say Find News,
it looks at what you have highlighted,
packages up a call to this service,
calls out to the online service,
and gets back a bunch of XML.
And then it reparses that XML,
transforms it into... To HTML,
and then pops up the web
browser with information.
So I looked up Darwin,
so who knows if there'll
be any Apple stuff.
But if we just go to... I don't know.
This is like a lot of... You have
to be careful what you do here.
I'm not going to click
on just any one of these.
A lot of drinking.
Interesting.
Charles Darwin.
Okay, this might be safe.
So it goes out to the
particular news story,
and it's at that plane dealer,
and Charles Darwin, you lose the game.
Okay, it's something about Ohio schools.
But anyhow, it's pretty interesting.
And that all happened really fast.
Again, that's live.
I don't even know where
this company is located.
They could be running a .NET
server or a Java server.
I don't know.
I don't need to know.
It just works.
So how did we get there from here?
Well, the first thing I did was
I downloaded a WSDL file.
And I did that, actually,
from... Let me go to one of these places.
I believe it was xmethods.com.
So this is one of those web
service listing companies
that's kind of like Yahoo.
This one... Is this the one that
lists what it's implemented in?
Yeah.
So this is really interesting.
They have a bunch of web
services listed here.
And let me hide my doc here.
and one of the things they do actually
is they say what implementation it is
and they also say how you can get to it.
But in the end they just provide WSDL and
links to the companies who do it.
Let's see if...
[Transcript missing]
is the director of the
Java Virtual Machine Center at
the University of California,
and he is the director of the
Java Virtual Machine Center at
the University of California.
I'm going to go to the area where
I dumped all the Google information.
I just grabbed this, compiled it,
and it ran.
Again, just standard Java, standard XML,
standard SOAP.
In the case of Google,
I had to first go out and
register at Google's site,
and I got back a key.
Don't copy this down.
This is my secret key.
It's interesting.
People are on the frontier of
what to do with web services.
These are some of the problems that
I remember we discussing when working
on UDDI with Microsoft and IBM.
How people will get a
guarantee of service.
How you'll establish contracts
and those sorts of things.
I've seen a couple of
interesting developments.
One is this Google approach
where you register,
you get a key,
and then to call the service,
you need to pass the key.
Then to call the service,
you need to pass that key along.
They have a couple of services.
One is neat.
They just allow spelling.
That broke off when I did more.
[Transcript missing]
To review what that Finder example was,
you just went to that Services menu item,
you went to Internal News Process,
and that went out over HTTP,
in this case a de facto standard,
to the More News Service.
It packaged up XML for the result.
Back to my News Process,
I put that in HTML and
I sent it to the browser.
These are some URL references.
These are just interesting
places you can go.
The W3C has a lot of
information about web services.
The IBM and Microsoft have
the WS inspection spec.
You can go to uddi.org to
get the UDDI information.
Web services listings, again,
my two favorites,
South Central and X Methods.
The SOAP Access Toolkit, again,
xml.apache.org.
And Sun Jack's API, which you can do all
the same things with.
I think they have Early Access 2 out now.
From their website,
just go to java.sun.com or javasoft.com,
and it's right up there right in front.
You can go and grab that.
They have a bunch of great tutorials
at Sun as well about web services
and how to use the Jack's API.
unexpected slide.
They slipped this in.
I didn't see this.
So I guess this is different ways to
get the documentation and the slides,
et cetera.
and Roadmap at 2:00 today,
Web Objects and Web Services.
That'll be a real interesting
You-Want-To-Go-To session.
And we've already had some other
Web Services talks previously that
I hope you were able to attend,
such as Steve Zeller's talk.